The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this show is social science fiction and satire.
Almost any science fiction book concerning the future will suggest a future society. A
novel on space exploration will imply technology and social motivation behind the exploration.
Robot stories usually describe society's reaction to humanoid machines. But there are a rather large
class of novels and stories that deal primarily with societies of the future. Narratives in which
the focus is on the structure of future societies, the societal attitudes, religion,
mores, personal lifestyles, and the politics of an extrapolated future. Sometimes these books
are critical in their speculations about where mankind and his social institutions are heading.
Sometimes they are outright depressing and pessimistic. At other times they treat the
subject with humor or satire, either of a gentle or biting nature. It is in this area especially
that one can perceive the unique values of science fiction, since novels of the future
allow for serious speculation on both the immediate and far-reaching destiny of man.
Some of the greatest science fiction novels of all time belong to that category of social
science fiction. In that type of imaginative fiction, with a strong social comment, has an
awfully long tradition behind it. I think you can take it back at least to Plato's Republic,
back in classical days. Then Sir Thomas Moore in the Renaissance, of course, had his famous
utopia, which dealt with the future society. Francis Bacon wrote The New Atlantis in the
early 17th century. At the end of the 19th, Samuel Butler published Erwan and Ralph Bellamy
published Looking Backward, both in regard to future societies. But the master, H. G. Wells,
many of his books dealt with societies of the future. The Time Machine of 1895 described
a future society very pessimistically. When the sleeper wakes, almost at the turn of the
century, he did the same thing. Wells also, in his War of the Worlds, described what it
might be like if England, or Great Britain, the great colonizer of their time, was invaded
by a technology vastly superior to theirs. As England was invaded in Africa at that time,
that could be considered sort of a satire. I think probably his deepest treatment of
a future society that would be men like God's published in 1922. That's a little later than
most of his other books. In it, he dealt with overpopulation, the misuse of science. He
described a world teetering almost chaotically on ruin. And his solution to it was birth control
and the elimination of the unfit in order to get society to get it moving again. But
the time machine of the future society, which described future societies and set the tone
for almost all of the other treatments of them, would be Huxley's Brave New World in
1932 and Orwell's 1984, published about halfway through the century.
These two novels show us two different styles or approaches to the social commentary. In
Huxley's Brave New World, we see a dystopia caused by technology, the genetic engineering
that is involved. As opposed to Orwell, where here we have a system that is politically
repressed. It is not necessarily the technology that's caused this. It's a political thing.
Yes. In Huxley's Brave New World, he used a sort of class society which divided people
up into various levels. The Alphas were the elite of the system. They were the makers
of the government. And then it went on down through betas and gammas and epsilons and
deltas. And each one had various functions that they carried out. The Alphas and betas
and gammas and so on were brought about through genetic engineering. They were individually
engineered so that they would have special abilities, some having higher levels of thought
and some having greater levels of manual dexterity. Others set up for heavy labor and lifting
and stuff like that.
Of course, that class system, that regimentation you mentioned comes about because of the science,
the technology which the people have no choice. In other words, they're engineered to be what
particular class they're in. But in Orwell, that kind of regimentation is due to politics
rather than science or technology. Orwell was caught between two authoritarian dictators,
I guess you'd say. Hitler was right behind him when he was writing his book in Stalin.
He was right in front of him. So it was almost natural that he would deal with politics in
his dystopian society.
Several of the catchwords from the book have remained faithful throughout the years, although
the original reasons behind them, that being them slanted towards Stalin and his secret police,
people still use the term big brother when they talk about the IRS, some of the government
agencies like the CIA.
Any political entity that seems to repress the people is referred to as big brother,
whether it's become a phrase unto itself even away from the book.
Of course, many of the things that Orwell showed the government using, communication, spy devices
and so forth, we still have them today. He was extrapolating from the knowledge and the science
of his day. And of course, those extrapolations have come true.
Another thing he used in the novel was a term called Newspeak, which was really a new language
where specific terms and references to what the government didn't like, such as anti-government
activities, were deleted from the language. There were no words to define those particular types
of anti-government idioms. One of the party's prime sayings was who controls the past controls
the present and who controls the present controls the future. And the society was strictly controlled.
Everybody was watched all the time. And that means all the time when you're at home and
in your house or you're outside, you're always being monitored by some sort of sophisticated
telecommunications devices. I believe we'd have to say too that that's one of the more pessimistic
futurian or dystopian novels and that the ending is not really upbeat or not very hopeful.
The protagonist in the novel thinks he's broken away at least somewhat from this society,
but he is found out and brought into the ministry of love, which is really the police,
and they interrogate him and eventually put him through some severe behavioral modification
techniques. And he is brought about to once more being a integral part of society,
thinking Big Brother is good for him, think the party is watching out for him,
and once more becomes a complacent cog in the wheel. The point is perhaps an examination of
whether or not society can be controlled to the point where people will forget that they're human
and will forget their drives of going on progressing and whether they can be
satiated with all of their needs met by the society itself.
I think we might also divide our discussion into two areas here. Now, all of these novels,
of course, deal with the future, but some of them are more aimed at simply commenting on
future societies, whether they think they're going to be good ones or not, whereas others
are actively satiric in which they make fun or criticize certain aspects of today's society.
But I think one of the better known novels, which is I think mostly one of social comment,
pessimistic though it is, is Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451, which when you look at the date of publication
1953 is surprisingly enough only four years later than Orwell's 1984. But I think it does stem from
Huxley, Fahrenheit 451 does in that it's the technology which is dominant. Our electronic
media-oriented society has done away with books and the people are subject to electronics.
They are rather complacent populace. They sit around and watch television all the time, and the
television is huge. It covers the entire wall. In fact, it can cover three walls in a person's house.
If they provide for the society or for the state to their best ability, they may actually get a
fourth screen and have a room that completely surrounds them with television. Bradbury does
have, I think, some ingenious things in the novel. For instance, the fireman, one of the,
well, the main character is a fireman. Their job is to start fires rather than put them out.
And the fires they start, of course, are book-burning fires. Anybody who's caught with a book is guilty
of a social sin. And it's near the end of the book that the protagonist who's escaped his fireman's
job and is trying to get away from the hound, the electrical hound, was chasing him. He runs
across from misfits, some bums or some hobos down by the river. And each one of them is a book.
He has totally memorized one of the classics from the past and knows it word by word, line by line.
So that even though they no longer own books or have have access to them,
they still remember the great ideas from the past simply because they've memorized them and
try to keep themselves intact and safe so that they can retain this knowledge.
In essence, his novel starts out as a dystopia, but ends up having a sort of glimmer of hope at
the end of it. At least that these ideas from the past, these great works will not perish,
but will be kept alive, handed down to the agents by word of mouth.
This last aspect of the book was treated very well, I think, in the 1966 film of this book
made by Francois Turfot. The scene of the book Learners at the End is one of the more
marvelous things in that film. The mood is just right with each person spouting off part of the
books that he knows, memorizing it and remembering it, and the old man teaching his knowledge to
the young man so that that will be passed on from generation to generation.
You know, it's remarkable how many movies of science fiction nature have this type of social
comment as a purpose. It's almost as if Hollywood has taken as its special province the kind of
science fiction novel or story which would describe a future society, and there have been many of them,
you know, going all the way back into the early days of movie making as far back as
oh the 20s or 30s, things to come. In that particular film and the story it was adapted from,
which was called Shape of Things to Come, Wells speculates on what the future might be after
an upcoming war which he visualizes in that. The future is fairly bleak, at least in Great
Britain, until the airmen come over from the Mediterranean and help them set up a new civilization,
and through technology they eventually rebuild the earth. It's a fairly optimistic.
We also might mention the movie THX 1138 by George Lucas.
This was prior to the time when Lucas wrote and produced American Graffiti and then followed
it by Star Wars. This particular movie was about a dystopian future where everybody lived underground
in an extremely regimented society where sex was forbidden. People were kept in control by use
of drugs whenever they began to feel good or feel bad. They simply went to the medicine cabinet in
the bathroom, opened it up and told the medicine cabinet how they felt, and it would dispense drugs
to take care of how they felt. It would make them feel back in a complacent, compliant mood that
was condoned by the government. Soilent Green came out in 1973. That was from a novel by Harry
Harrison entitled Make Room, Make Room, and it's one of the classic overpopulation novels.
In this case it's food that they're running out of, and the population is fed by sort of
biscuits or crackers of different colors, and the protagonist, played by Charlton Heston in the movie,
investigates and by the end of the movie finds out the horrible fact that the crackers or the
biscuits that people are now eating, called Soilent Green, are made from disposed of bodies, human
bodies, and the movie ends on that rather grisly note. We better mention just a few other significant
novels of social comment before we get onto satire. John Brunner, a 1976 public shockwave writer,
and I think that should be mentioned. Brunner's been called a master of sociological extrapolation.
He's a writer on society, that's his thing. In that book he pictures a 21st century America,
which is totally based on computers and data processing. This is a technology that is shaped
society, and you have a plug-in society which is developed. The computer is everywhere. People
plug into it, get their directions, tell the government what they're doing, and so forth.
And the hero named Nick learns how to alter the computer's data banks, which reveals a government
manipulation of people and so forth. At the end of the book you get the impression that maybe
something is going to be done about it. This kind of repressive computer society might be overthrown.
Similar concept was brought forth in Hour 11's This Perfect Day written in 1970.
And as usual, as you might expect, Larry Niven and Jerry Pornel get into the act. They cover almost
every category of science fiction you could think of. Their 1976 novel Inferno, I think,
would have to be considered an important novel, a social comment. What they did was rewrite Dante's
Inferno in science fiction terms and explore different facets of human psychology.
I'd like to mention also one other novel that would fit in this category. A very optimistic
novel called Inferio by Jack Vance. It's set on another planet, but it is a human society. This is
far in the future when humans have expanded into space on many planets.
We have a society here that is repressed by a system of lords and ladies who live away from
the common people. And the people are known for their handcrafted work. And they are kept doing
this handcrafted work. They're repressed in the way that they cannot produce anything that's
duplicated, not even printing. One of our people on the planet, the protagonist,
breaks away from this society because he feels like that their life is really meaningless. It's
just the same old thing every day in and out. He breaks away from the society and then eventually
shows them the error of it and changes the society for better. Another way that an author might comment
on society or some of the problems that he sees in society is by using satire,
where he can poke fun with humor at what's happening in society, or he can bitterly criticize
what's going on in society. I think the classic here would be the Space Merchants. It was originally
published as a novelette called The Gravy Planet. And I think it was 1952 edition of Galaxy.
Cyril Kornbluth and Frederick Polakorst collaborated on it. But probably in terms of pure satire
and also pure extrapolation from the present, this novel I think would be above most others.
It's a totally advertising society. Consider how much time, effort, influence that advertising has
in our society today. Some people think, you know, the hidden persuader, for instance, by
Vance Packard was a study that illustrated the importance of advertising. Now what Kornbluth
and Polakorst have done is to set up a society where the total society from the government on
down is based on advertising. The heroes of the society are so-called copy smiths, people who
are master advertisers, masters at molding the minds of the people. One of the phrases in
advertising, cutthroat competition is brought into a grim reality here in that if one of your
competitors in advertising comes up with an idea that you want, you can literally declare a war on
him and physically go out and attack his corporation and win from him that specific contract.
The world in which this particular novel takes place is overpopulated and the resources have
been drained. The protagonist is the head of a project which will take a lot of the populace
off to Venus to mine for specific minerals and metals to refurbish the resources on earth.
What they have to do is convince the populace that it's a good thing to go to Venus because it's a
wonderful place. Whereas in actuality, they know that Venus is a horrible place and they're going
to have to live in domed underground cities and whatnot. That turns out to be the solution to
the novel because the basic conflict is between the leaders of this advertising society and a
group of conservationists called the conces. The conces feel that man has to get off the earth.
His whole value system has to change and he has to get off the earth to do that. They help and use
the protagonist at the same time to the one involved with the Venus project. They help him
so that this campaign is successful and their people, the conservationists,
are the ones who go to Venus. I think we're supposed to believe they will start a new vital
society on that planet. One of the things that helps the protagonist make it up his mind about
the Venus project and what he's going to do with it is he's kidnapped in Antarctica. His death is
Costa Rica as a lowly consumer and he gets to see life as a consumer whereas before he's been a
high executive and he's had special privileges that went along with that rank. Once he sees society
from the other side, he believes there are certain things that he wants to do about it in order to
change society. The style of the novel I think should be called a prospective reader's attention
too. It's very cleverly done. There are many puns. There are many restatements of present
little sayings or advertising cliches and so forth which are extrapolated and changed a
little bit for this novel. It causes a great deal of humor. I think that kind of humor and that kind
of biting criticism that the authors put into the book definitely qualified as a work of satire.
Not just simple social comment but they are satirizing our present day society and the
importance we give to business and advertising. Another novel which satirizes advertising is
The Big Bottle Wax by Shepard Mead written in 1954. It does to television what space merchants
does to advertising in general. It extrapolates on what television might become at least from the
viewpoint of a person who is living in the 50s. It shows how it dominates his life through advertising
and courses him into buying products which he might generally if he had time to think about
he wouldn't buy. It dehumanizes the news by using dolls to reenact various natural disasters and
crimes whereby people don't actually see human suffering. All they see are these little dolls
reenacting the specific tragedies. Both of those books I think concentrate on
specific facets of our present day society for instance advertising or television.
But there's another writer Stanislaw Lam who satire is really aimed at almost the whole human
race. He'll pick almost everything possible and satirize it sooner or later in some of his works.
This satire is of the very very humorous variety. It's just a joy to read and there's all sorts
of different escapades that he gets his stories into and out of. One novel we might mention in
particular is The Siberiad. The concept of the novel is that far in the future humankind has
degenerated and the robots that they built ages and ages ago have become a civilization
unto themselves. There are two main characters both of course are robots, trurl and clopalceus.
They are constructors. Their design is to build things. There are all sorts of different kinds
of robots but their main purpose is to build other things, other machines. They get into
all sorts of escapades and usually they're a little bit vying with each other to come up with
something a little bit better than the other one did. One episode that might illustrate the idea of
satirizing society is a very short one called trurl's prescription and he postulates out in
remote space a small planet of a small creatures called the steely pips and they live in a very
mechanized society, very happy society until a great comet comes by one day and deposits something
they don't know what it is onto their planet. This something whatever it is according to the book
flies up lands on the highest peak and makes itself comfortable and doesn't budge but it's
an awful nuisance all the same. Well the steely pips call in trurl one of the one of the constructors
to see if he can get rid of it for them because they've tried everything and they want to know if
they they can bring them some tnt or dynamite or or radiation or whatever that he needs and trurl
says no you just need paper ink stamps and seals sealing wax and thumb tacks and blotters and a
teller window and zink teaspoon and coffee and a mailman and he proceeds to set up an office
and starts sending the creature whatever it is summonses and notices and you will have to
vacate by certain time if you don't sign these particular forms and so forth. Finally the
creature which has condescended to reply to the notices is ordered to vacate and has to do so
because he's playing along with the system that trurl set up. At the very end of the story
trurl explains how this worked to the steely pips who are quite confounded they don't understand.
He says basically my dears the whole thing was quite simple the moment it accepted the first
dispatched and signed for it it was done for. I employed a special machine the machine with a big
B for as the cosmos is this cosmos no one's looked at yet. B of course stands for bureaucracy.
Yeah the the stories in the Siberiad as you say they belong to a almost like a novel with
these two characters doing their thing but they're almost set up like separate little fables and in
some of them his satire is aimed at much larger things in society. He gets his two characters
involved in another adventure near the end of the Siberiad and they discover a civilization which
has reached the highest possible level of development. They call it an HPLD civilization
and they want to learn from these people why what's it like to be in the highest possibly
developed state and these creatures don't want to respond they're simply stagnant
but finally they do respond because of certain machinations and certain overtures that the two
robots make and they give the two robots a compound called altruizine and they say altruizine if you
put it in the water supply of any plant any city whatever will make everyone feel the same way as
everybody else does and this should bring about universal brotherhood in other words you can feel
exactly what your neighbor your friend your relative whatever is feeling and this should
you know cause all violence to stop because if you feel something like they do you'll understand
them better but I think uh stand-as-law limb can be somewhat cynical sometimes and I think this is
one instance of it the two robots do put this substance into the water supply of a planet
and it causes immediate chaos everybody feels the pain of everybody else and they suffer and they
try to do away with the other people so that they their suffering will stop and the whole place
is just turned upside down because of humanitarian motives of these two robots one of the more
interesting satirists of our time is Kurt Vonnegut there's an interesting story behind Vonnegut's work
he's always tried to avoid the label of being a science fiction writer uh he realized that
science fiction authors are not as highly considered by critics and teachers and scholars and so forth
as mainstream writers so he's always tried to avoid that label but I would say 75 of his work would
have to be classified as science fiction uh he's written about time travel for instance in slaughter
house five he's written about robots and space travel in the sirens of titan a player piano
was considered a classic dystopia of an automated world uh cat's cradle is a cataclysmic novel which
with definite science fiction overtones in it and back in the 50s and early 60s he published
stories in science fiction magazines like galaxy fantasy and science fiction if wonder stories and
so forth and he's one of the rare writers I think who's noticed by critics and readers beyond the
circle of science fiction people and one of his classic satiric stories uh would be one published
in 1961 in galaxy entitled harrison bergeron in harrison bergeron you see a society where it is
mandatory that you be equal to everybody else if you are an athlete you're required to wear
weights in order to slow you down so you can't move faster than anybody else if you are exceptionally
beautiful you're required to wear a mask so you won't appear prettier than anybody else in fact the
government is in charge of enforcing these rules there's there's even a united states
handicapper general who who makes uh all of the judgments as to whom should wear what kind of a
mask and to what degree and same thing for belts and and other devices there are also uh devices
that uh fit in the ear that are loudspeakers that will inject very weird sounds or sound effects
or crashes or noises to distract an agile mind from being able to think straight meaning that
they would be smarter or quicker or medley than someone else that they even enforce that kind
of mental mediocrity and harrison bergeron is is almost the antithesis of what the society believes
in he's he's huge he's seven feet tall he's beautiful you know has the body of a greek god
he's also a genius and he manages to escape all the traps and all the restrictions that the society
has imposed on people and escapes and meets a beautiful ballerina who's been dancing of course
with lead weights on her body and they immediately fall in love this perfect pair all beautiful all
intelligent uh and so forth and they start to rise dancing and their beautiful dance of love
and um also they're on television at the time that this is going on and everybody is watching
this beautiful happening and uh one of the people comes in from the handicappers the government
handicappers and shoots them with a shotgun and kills them both and they both fall to the floor
dead and then uh the scene shifts back to uh harrison bergeron's parents who are watching this
program and uh his father re-enters the room he's going out to get a sandwich while this beautiful
stuff was going on and uh when he comes back in uh he his wife has a few tears on her face and he
says well what happened he says well something beautiful happened on the television but i can't
really remember what it was and he says well that's the way it ought to be and then things just keep
going on in conclusion we might say that it's clear that novels of social comment are among the more
thoughtful of science fiction books usually the author is seriously concerned with mankind's future
and it's not merely creating a pure adventure story to excite the readers like in star wars
it is in this category of satire and social comment that science fiction has contributed
most significantly to mainstream fiction this is david cruz darrell lane and david carson
this has been the science fiction radio show a presentation of the permean basin science fiction
association in conjunction with kocv fm and odessa college odessa texas